--- PAGE 1 ---
Working with Dimensions 

--- PAGE 2 ---
Agenda 
 Primary Key 
 Surrogate keys 
 Attributes 
 
 Date dimension 
 Time dimension 
 “Not applicable” row in dimension 
 
 Types of Dimensions 
 Degenerate Dimension 
 Conformed Dimension 
 Slowly Changing Dimension 
 Fast Changing Dimension 
2 

--- PAGE 3 ---
Preliminary retail sales grocery store dimensional 
model 
 
3 


--- PAGE 4 ---
Use Surrogate keys as Primary keys for dimension 
tables 
 It is important that primary keys of dimension tables remain stable.  
 It is strongly recommended that surrogate keys are created and used for 
primary keys for all dimension tables. 
 
 Surrogate keys are keys that are maintained within the data warehouse 
instead of the natural keys taken from source data systems. 
 Also known as "dummy keys", "non-natural keys", "artificial keys", 
"meaningless keys", ... 
 
4 

--- PAGE 5 ---
Why Use Surrogate keys 
 Data tables in various OLTP source systems may use different keys for the same entity. 
 E.g., one source system uses NRIC, another source system uses Passport number 
 
 It is also possible that a single key is being used by different instances of the same entity 
 
 This can be a major problem when trying to consolidate information from various source 
systems 
 
 A surrogate key uniquely identifies each entity in the dimension table, regardless of its 
natural source key.  
 
 A surrogate key generates a simple integer value for every new entity. 
 
 Surrogate keys provide the means to maintain data warehouse information when dimensions 
change. 
5 

--- PAGE 6 ---
Examples of Surrogate keys 
6 
DimCustomer 
DimCurrency 
 FactOnlineSales 

--- PAGE 7 ---
Surrogate keys and Change of Dimension 
 Examples of change:  
 Changes in the organization sales force structures  
 If a sales representative is transferred from one region to another, the organization may want 
to track all sales for the sales representative with the original region for data prior to the 
transfer date, and sales data for the sales representative in the new region after the transfer 
date 
 
 A bank Customer change from consumer banking segment to private banking segment  
 The bank wants to attribute the related revenue/profit to consuemr banking business before 
the change and attribute the related revenue/profit to private banking after the change  
 
 Surrogate key can help 
 The person is represented twice in the dimension table with two different surrogate keys: one before 
the change, one after the change  
 The person's unique identifier will still be captured in the dimension table, to enable analysis/query based 
on identifier 
7 

--- PAGE 8 ---
Example: Surrogate keys and Change of 
Dimension 
CustomerKey Identifier FirstName LastName AUM Segment Change 
Date 
79 12345678 David Tan 102,300 Mass 2021-09-19  
562 12345678 David Tan 15,000,000 PB 
8 
Use Surrogate key as primary key for dimension table. 
 
Use multiple rows to represent the change. 
 
Use a separate field in the dimension table to preserve the natural key of the entity being used in the 
source system.  
This helps us to go back to the original source if we need to track from where (which OLTP Source) the data 
came into the dimensional model.  
We can summarize fact table data for a single entity in the fact table (using the natural key) regardless of 
the number of times the entity’s record appears in the dimension table. 

--- PAGE 9 ---
Attributes in Dimension Table 
 Non-key columns are generally referred to as attributes. 
 The dimension tables should contain business descriptive columns that users 
reference to define their restriction criteria for ad hoc business queries. 
 The dimension table attributes show up as report labels inside the reports for 
senior management. 
 Use a separate field in the dimension table to preserve the natural source system 
key of the entity being used in the source system. 
 Attributes reflect the potential areas of interest and attributes that can be used 
for aggregations as well as for selective constraints and report breaks. 
 If a dimension table includes a code, in most cases, include the code description as 
well. 
 The dimensional attributes serve as headings of the columns of the report and 
should be descriptive and easy to understand. 
 E.g., 0/1 or Y/N is better represented as Yes/No 
9 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Date Dimension 
 It is very important to identify the 
granularity of the date and time 
dimensions. 
 Date and time dimensions help determine 
the granularity of the overall dimensional 
model and the level of information that is 
stored in it. 
 All data warehouse has a date dimension 
because all dimensional models are based 
on a time series of operations. 
10 


--- PAGE 11 ---
Date Dimension 
 The date dimension does not have an OLTP source system connected to it.  
 The date dimension can be built independently even before the actual dimensional 
design has started.  
 The best way to built a date dimension is to identify all columns needed and then use 
SQL language to populate the date dimension table for columns such as date, day, 
month, and year.  
 For other columns, such as holidays, with Christmas or Boxing Day, manual entries may 
be required.  
 The same is true for columns such as fiscal date, fiscal month, fiscal quarter, and fiscal 
years.  
 Can also use the spreadsheet to create the date dimension. 
11 

--- PAGE 12 ---
Time Dimension 
 The time dimension is handled separately from the date dimension. 
 If we have time as part of date dimension, and capture time at second level, 
we would have a huge number of rows in the dimension table even for a 
year: 
365 (Days) x 24 (Hours) x 60 (Minutes) x 60 (Seconds) = 31,536,000 rows 
 Design the time dimension based on user requirement. 
 hour 
 hour range 
 Early morning (6 a.m. to 8 a.m.) 
 Late morning hours (8 a.m. to 11 a.m.) 
 Rush hour (11 a.m. to 1 p.m.) 
 Lunch hour (1 p.m. to 2 p.m.) 
12 

--- PAGE 13 ---
Time Dimension 
 
13 


--- PAGE 14 ---
Special Row for the “Not applicable” Scenario in 
Dimension Tables  
 Typically, each dimension table will have one or more additional Not Applicable 
scenario records. 
 Two reasons: 
 The fact that the foreign key in a fact table can never be null 
 Handle situations where the key is not available 
 E.g., Customer ID is not available for non member customer 
 Properly label that the "Not applicable" row 
 E.g., "Non Member Customer", "Date unknown", "Does not have insurance" 
14 

--- PAGE 15 ---
Degenerate dimensions 
 degenerate dimensions: dimensions without any attributes  
 They are not typical dimensions, but often simply a transaction number that is placed inside the fact table  
 
 Examples:  
 transaction numbers 
 bill numbers 
 courier tracking number 
 order number 
 invoice number 
 application acknowledgement number 
 ticket number 
 reference numbers 
 
 Whether degenerate dimension is needed depends on grain of the fact table  
 degenerate dimension is needed for fine grained fact table  
 it is not needed for summary fact table  
15 
degenerate 
dimension  
Optional 

--- PAGE 16 ---
 
16 
Optional 

--- PAGE 17 ---
Conformed dimensions 
 conformed dimensions: dimension tables that are referenced or are likely to 
be referenced by multiple fact tables 
 
 Identify whether a dimension being used already exists inside the enterprise 
data warehouse 
 
 For a non-existent new dimension, create a new dimension with planned 
long-term cross-enterprise usage. 
17 
Optional 

--- PAGE 18 ---
Slowly Changing Dimensions (SCD) 
 A slowly changing dimension is a dimension whose attributes for a record 
(row) change slowly over time. 
 Example: Address of customer 
 
18 
customer moves to California 
Optional 

--- PAGE 19 ---
Three Ways to Handle the Change 
 SCD Type 1: The new row replaces the original record 
 No trace of the old record exists 
 
 
 
 SCD Type 2: A new row is added into the customer dimension table. 
 The new row gets its own primary key (surrogate key) 
19 
Optional 

--- PAGE 20 ---
Three Ways to Handle the Change 
 SCD Type 3: The original record is modified to reflect the change. Also 
a new column is added to record the previous value prior to the 
change. 
 
20 
Optional 

--- PAGE 21 ---
Fast changing dimensions 
 A fast changing dimension is a dimension whose attributes for a record (row) change 
fast over time. Also called rapidly changing dimensions. 
 
 Cannot be handled using the Type-1, Type-2, or Type-3 approaches used for slowly 
changing dimensions. 
 
 The best approach for handling very fast changing dimensions is to separate the fast 
changing attributes into one or more separate dimensions which are called mini-
dimensions. 
 
 The fact table then has two or more foreign keys—one for the primary dimension table 
and another for the one or more mini-dimensions (consisting of fast changing 
attributes). 
21 
Optional 

--- PAGE 22 ---
The Fact Table has Foreign Keys to Both 
Dimension Table and Mini-Dimension Table 
 
22 
Optional 